Namespaces in Kubernetes (Video 1:19 - )

A Kubernetes namespace is a way to divide a single cluster into separate virtual spaces. It acts like fences inside a community garden, 
letting different teams or projects share the same plot of land without stepping on each others' plants.

Why Use Namespaces?

Stop Name Clashes: Two teams can name their application my-web-app without causing any errors.
Share Costs: You only buy one cluster instead of buying separate hardware for every team.
Limit Power: You can stop the testing team from accidentally editing the live store website.
Control Resources: You can set limits so the marketing app does not hog all the memory.

The Standard Namespaces

When you start a new cluster, Kubernetes automatically builds a few standard spaces for you [1]:

default: The main room where your apps go if you do not pick a specific namespace [1].
kube-system: The secret engine room where Kubernetes keeps its own internal control tools [1].
kube-public: A public room that anyone can see, mostly used for cluster setup info [1].
kube-node-lease: A small closet that holds heartbeats to check if computers are still online [1].

Working with Namespaces

You can create and look inside spaces using simple commands in your terminal:

Create a space: kubectl create namespace team-alpha [2]
See all spaces: kubectl get namespaces [1]
Put an app in a space: kubectl apply -f app.yaml --namespace=team-alpha [2]

Manifest file in kubernetes
Manifest file in kubernetesA Kubernetes manifest file is a text file that tells Kubernetes how to set up your application resources. It 
is usually written in YAML format, but it can also use JSON. You write the desired state of your system in this file, and Kubernetes 
works automatically to make the cluster match it.

The Four Required Fields

Every manifest file needs four basic pieces of information:

apiVersion: This tells Kubernetes which version of its API code to use.
kind: This tells Kubernetes what type of resource you want to create. Examples include a Pod, a Deployment, or a Service.
metadata: This holds basic info to identify the resource, like its name or labels.
spec: This details exactly how you want the resource to look and behave. This includes things like container images or port numbers.

A Simple Example
Here is a basic example of a manifest file for a single Pod resource:

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: my-web-app
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx-container
    image: nginx:latest

Why Developers Use Manifest Files

Declarative style: You describe the final result you want, rather than giving step-by-step commands.
Version control: You can save these files in Git to track changes over time.
Automation: These files easily plug into CI/CD pipelines to deploy apps automatically.
Clean sorting: You can separate multiple resources in one single file by using three dashes (---).

ReplicaSet Vs StatefulSet Vs Deployment (Video - 1:50

Deployments manage standard, stateless apps.
StatefulSets manage apps that need unique identities and saved data.
ReplicaSets keep a set number of identical Pods running.

Quick Comparison

Feature                    ReplicaSet                          Deployment                              StatefulSet
Main Use                   Basic scaling                       Stateless apps                          Stateful apps
Pod Names                  Random suffixes                     Random suffixes                         Fixed index numbers
Storage                    Shared volume                       Shared volume                           Unique volume per Pod
Rollouts                   Manual updates                      Automated rollouts                      Careful, ordered updates

1. ReplicaSet

A ReplicaSet ensures that a specific number of Pods are running at the same time. It is a simple tool that watches your cluster and 
starts or stops Pods to match your target number. You rarely create ReplicaSets directly. Instead, you use Deployments to manage them for
you.

Best for: Ensuring basic app uptime.
Pod Identity: Every Pod is identical and interchangeable.
Example: Running three copies of a simple web page.

2. Deployment

A Deployment is a higher-level tool that controls ReplicaSets. It lets you update your app to a new version without downtime. If an 
update fails, the Deployment can automatically roll back to the old version. It is the most common way to deploy stateless apps.

Best for: Web servers, APIs, and stateless apps.
Key Feature: Easy, automated app updates.
Example: Hosting an online store front-end that saves no local data.

3. StatefulSet

A StatefulSet manages apps that require a unique identity or persistent storage. Unlike standard Pods, these Pods are not interchangeable.
They are created in a strict order (0, 1, 2) and keep their exact same name and storage disk even if they restart.

Best for: Databases and clustered apps.
Key Feature: Unique storage and fixed network IDs for each Pod.
Example: Running databases like MySQL, PostgreSQL, or MongoDB.

Labels and Selectors (Video - 1:52

Rolling Update in Deployment (Video - 1:57
