Scaling and Scheduling (Video - 4:32 - 6:08)

Resource Quotas and Limits
Resource Quotas and Limits in kubernetesIn Kubernetes, resource management is handled via two distinct levels: Resource Quotas, which 
manage aggregate resource consumption at the Namespace level, and Requests and Limits, which regulate individual Containers and Pods. 
Together, they prevent multi-tenant environments from starving neighboring applications and exhausting cluster capacity.

Namespace Scope: ResourceQuotas
A ResourceQuota is an administrative tool that caps the absolute maximum infrastructure resources and object counts a specific Namespace
can use. If an incoming request (like creating a Pod) breaches this quota, the API server rejects it with an HTTP 403 Forbidden error.

Compute Quotas: Restricts total requests.cpu, limits.cpu, requests.memory, and limits.memory combined across all Pods in the Namespace.
Storage Quotas: Caps the total storage volume capacity (requests.storage) and the number of persistentvolumeclaims allowed.
Object Count Quotas: Prevents resource sprawl by setting a ceiling on the total number of Pods, Services, ConfigMaps, Secrets, or 
Deployments that can exist.

Example ResourceQuota Manifest
apiVersion: v1
kind: ResourceQuota
metadata:
  name: team-alpha-quota
  namespace: alpha-apps
spec:
  hard:
    requests.cpu: "4"
    requests.memory: 8Gi
    limits.cpu: "8"
    limits.memory: 16Gi
    pods: "10"
    services: "5"

Container Scope: Requests and Limits
While quotas track the whole Namespace, Requests and Limits are defined directly in the Container spec of a Pod template to control 
individual workloads.

Resource Requests: The guaranteed minimum amount of CPU or Memory Kubernetes promises to the container. The kube-scheduler uses this 
number to decide which Node has enough remaining capacity to host the Pod.

Resource Limits: The hard ceiling on resources a container can consume.
  Memory Over-limit: If a container tries to use more RAM than its limit, the Linux kernel triggers an Out-Of-Memory (OOM) exception, and
  Kubernetes restarts the container.
  CPU Over-limit: If a container reaches its CPU limit, Kubernetes throttles its processing power rather than killing it.

Example Container Manifest

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: web-server
  namespace: alpha-apps
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx:latest
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: "256Mi"
        cpu: "500m" # 0.5 cores
      limits:
        memory: "512Mi"
        cpu: "1" # 1 full core

The Enforcer: LimitRanges
When you activate a ResourceQuota for CPU or Memory, Kubernetes mandates that every single Pod deployed to that Namespace must explicitly
specify its own requests and limits. To save developers from manually writing these specifications for every file, you can use a Kubernetes

LimitRange.A LimitRange automatically applies default requests and limits to any Pod created without them, ensuring compliance with the
larger Namespace quota.

Quick Reference Comparison

Feature                          ResourceQuota                                    Requests & Limits
Enforcement Level                Namespace                                        Individual Container / Pod
Primary Purpose                  Tenant isolation and cost control                App stability and node scheduling
Metrics Controlled               Sum of resources + total API objects             CPU, Memory, and Ephemeral Storage
Breach Consequence               API Server blocks deployment (403 Forbidden)     Container Throttling (CPU) or OOM Kill (RAM)

To check the active usage of your current quotas, you can run the command:
kubectl describe quota -n <your-namespace>

Probes (Video 4:40 - 4:48)
In Kubernetes, probes are diagnostic health checks performed periodically by the kubelet on a container to ensure applications are running
smoothly, self-healing when broken, and only receiving traffic when ready. They allow the cluster to automatically detect and recover from
runtime errors without manual intervention.

The Three Types of Probes
Kubernetes utilizes three main probes to manage container lifecycles:

Startup Probe: Confirms the app has launched; disables other probes until it passes to prevent premature restarts.
Liveness Probe: Detects if an application is frozen or deadlocked, triggering a container restart.
Readiness Probe: Determines if a container can handle traffic, removing it from Service endpoints if it fails.

Probe Mechanisms
The kubelet uses four primary methods to check health:
HTTP Get: Checks a specific endpoint for a 200–399 response code.
TCP Socket: Opens a connection to a specific port to check if it's open.
Exec Command: Runs a command inside the container, passing if it returns a 0 exit code.
gRPC: Uses the native gRPC Health Checking Protocol.

Key Configuration Parameters
Probes are configured using these common fields:
initialDelaySeconds: Wait time before the first check.
periodSeconds: Frequency of the checks.
failureThreshold: Consecutive failures needed to trigger an action.

Taint and Tolerance (4:48 - 5:00)
Taints and tolerations are node-level properties in Kubernetes that allow nodes to repel certain pods so they do not get scheduled on 
inappropriate hardware or dedicated infrastructure. While node affinity attracts pods to nodes, taints do the exact opposite by letting
a node push pods away unless the pod explicitly has a matching toleration.

The Three Taint Effects
When a node is tainted, it applies one of three scheduling behaviors:
NoSchedule: Strong restriction. New pods without a matching toleration will never schedule on this node. Existing pods on the node are
unaffected.
PreferNoSchedule: Soft restriction. The system tries to avoid placing untolerated pods on the node, but will do so if no other compute
resources are available.
NoExecute: Hard restriction. Evicts currently running pods immediately if they do not possess the required toleration, in addition to 
blocking new ones.

Configuration Examples
1. Adding a Taint to a NodeTo apply a taint using the command-line interface, execute the kubectl taint command:

kubectl taint nodes node1 storage-type=ssd:NoSchedule

2. Adding a Toleration to a PodTo allow a pod to bypass that taint, define the tolerations array inside the Pod’s spec configuration:

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: database-pod
spec:
  containers:
  - name: mysql
    image: mysql
  tolerations:
  - key: "storage-type"
    operator: "Equal"
    value: "ssd"
    effect: "NoSchedule"

Common Production Use Cases
Dedicated Nodes: Reserving specific nodes for machine learning workloads equipped with expensive GPU hardware.
Eviction Handling: The control plane automatically adds taints like node.kubernetes.io/unreachable to evict pods when a node loses 
network connection.
Master Node Isolation: Restricting infrastructure management nodes so user application workloads do not accidentally consume critical 
control plane resources.

HPA (4:59 - 5:51)and VPA (5:51 - 6:08) (5:20 - 5:51 HP Autoscaling implemented for Notes App project)

Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) and Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) are automated scaling mechanisms in Kubernetes that adjust your 
application's compute resources based on real-time usage metrics [1]. While HPA scales out by changing the number of pod replicas, VPA 
scales up by changing the CPU and memory size of existing pods [1].

Core Differences 
At A GlanceThe choice between HPA and VPA depends on whether your application scales better by adding more instances or by getting more
powerful instances.

Feature                    Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA)                        Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA)
Scaling Direction          Out / In (Horizontal) [1]                              Up / Down (Vertical) [1]
Action Taken               Adds or removes Pod replicas [1]                       Increases or decreases Pod CPU/Memory [1]
Best For                   Stateless applications (e.g., Web APIs)                Stateful or monolithic applications
Downside                   Higher cluster overhead per replica                    Requires Pod restarts to apply changes [1]
Metric Source              Kubernetes Metrics Server                              Kubernetes Metrics Server & VPA Recommender

Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA)
HPA monitors target resource utilization (like CPU or memory) and scales your deployment deployment count to handle high demand [1].

YAML Configuration Example

apiVersion: autoscaling/v2
kind: HorizontalPodAutoscaler
metadata:
  name: web-app-hpa
spec:
  scaleTargetRef:
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    name: web-app
  minReplicas: 2
  maxReplicas: 10
  metrics:
  - type: Resource
    resource:
      name: cpu
      target:
        type: Utilization
        averageUtilization: 70

Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA)
VPA frees you from manually setting container resource limits and requests [1]. It analyzes historical utilization data to adjust sizes
automatically [1].

VPA Operating Modes
Auto / Recreate: Automatically updates resource requests and restarts the pod to apply them [1].
Initial: Assigns resource sizes only when the pod is first created; never restarts them.
Off: Only recommends sizes without modifying the pods [1]. You can view recommendations using kubectl get vpa.

YAML Configuration Example

apiVersion: autoscaling.k8s.io/v1
kind: VerticalPodAutoscaler
metadata:
  name: database-vpa
spec:
  targetRef:
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    name: database-app
  updatePolicy:
    updateMode: "Auto"

Critical Warning: Combining HPA and VPADo not use HPA and VPA together on the same resource metric (like CPU or Memory) [1].
If both are set to scale based on CPU utilization, they will conflict [1]:

High CPU usage occurs.
HPA adds more pods to distribute the load.
Simultaneously, VPA increases the CPU size of the pods.
The load drops, triggering a sudden, unpredictable downscaling race condition that can crash your app.

Exception: You can combine them if HPA scales on custom/external metrics (like HTTP request queues) while VPA scales on CPU/Memory [1].

Node Affinity (6:08 - 6:11)
Node affinity is a set of scheduling rules in Kubernetes that allows you to constrain which nodes your pods can be scheduled on based on
labels present on those nodes. It acts as an advanced, highly flexible replacement for the older nodeSelector field, allowing you to use
complex logic operators and express both strict requirements and soft preferences.

